docs: testing explanation (#1635)
canonical/operator: docs/explanation/testing.md

(testing)=
# Testing

Charms should have tests to verify that they are functioning correctly. This page describes the types of testing that you should consider.

## Unit testing

> Unit tests isolate and validate individual code units (functions, methods, and so on) by mocking Juju APIs and workloads without external interactions. Unit tests are intended to be isolating and fast to complete. These are the tests you would run before committing any code changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unit tests isolate and validate individual code units (functions, methods, and so on) by mocking Juju APIs and workloads without external interactions. Unit tests are intended to be isolated and fast to complete. These are the tests you would run before committing any code changes.
```

Every unit test involves a mocked event context, as charms only execute in response to events. A charm doesn't do anything unless it's being run, and it is only run when an event occurs. So there is _always_ an event context to be mocked, and the starting point of a unit test is typically an event.

A charm acts like a function, taking event context (always present), configuration, relation data, and stored state as inputs. It then performs operations affecting its workload or other charms:

- System operations such as writing files.
- Cloud operations such as launching virtual machines.
- Workload operations, using Pebble in the case of a Kubernetes charm.
- Juju operations such as sharing data with related charms.

Unit tests focus on mapping these inputs to expected outputs. For example, a unit test could verify a system call, the contents of a file, or the contents of a relation databag.

> See also: {ref}`write-scenario-tests-for-a-charm`.

### Coverage

> Unit testing a charm should cover:

Reviewer: There are other things it may cover as well. How about:
```suggestion
Unit testing a charm should cover at least:
```

- How relation data is modified as a result of an event.
- What pebble services are running as a result of an event.
- Which configuration files are written and their contents, as a result of an event.

### Tools

- [`ops.testing`](ops_testing), the framework for state-transition testing in Ops

> - [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)

Reviewer: Let's avoid "and/or":
```suggestion
- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)
```

- [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) for automating and standardizing tests

The `ops.testing` framework provides `State`, which mocks inputs and outputs. The framework also provides `Context` and `Container`, which offer mock filesystems. Tests involve:

1. Setting up the charm, metadata, context, output mocks, and Juju state.
2. Simulating events using `Context.run`. For example, `config_changed`, `relation_changed`, `storage_attached`, `pebble_ready`, and so on.
3. Retrieving and asserting the output.

`Context` and `State` are instantiated before the charm. This enables you to prepare the state of config, relations, and storage before simulating an event.

### Examples

> - [https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/unit/test_charm.py](https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/unit/test_charm.py)

Reviewer: Let's update this example. It uses legacy `ops.testing.Harness` rather than scenario / state-transition testing. Can we link to one with scenario-based tests? Also, the link should be labelled, like `[Prometheus K8s charm unit tests](...)`

> See also: {ref}`write-tests-for-an-interface`.

### Coverage

Interface tests enable Charmhub to validate the relations of a charm and verify that your charm supports the registered interface. For example, if your charm supports an interface called "ingress", interface tests enable Charmhub to verify that your charm supports the [registered `ingress` interface](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/interfaces/ingress/v2).

Interface tests also:
- Enable alternative implementations of an interface to validate themselves against the contractual specification stored in `charm-relation-interfaces`.
- Help verify compliance with multiple versions of an interface.

An interface test has the following pattern: 

1) **Given** - An initial state of the relation over the interface under test.
2) **When** - A specific relation event fires.
3) **Then** - The state of the databags is valid. For example, the state satisfies a [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) schema.

> In addition to validity of the databag state, we could check for more elaborate conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to checking that the databag state is valid, we could check for more elaborate conditions.
```

### Tools

- [`ops.testing`](ops_testing)
- A pytest plugin called [`pytest-interface-tester`](https://github.com/canonical/pytest-interface-tester)

### Examples

> A typical interface test looks like:

Reviewer: Can we just link to an example here, rather than copy one in, to avoid cluttering this doc?

(testing)=
# Testing

Charms should have tests to verify that they are functioning correctly. This page describes the types of testing that you should consider.

## Unit testing

Unit tests isolate and validate individual code units (functions, methods, and so on) by mocking Juju APIs and workloads without external interactions. Unit tests are intended to be isolating and fast to complete. These are the tests you would run before committing any code changes.

> Every unit test involves a mocked event context, as charms only execute in response to events. A charm doesn't do anything unless it's being run, and it is only run when an event occurs. So there is _always_ an event context to be mocked, and the starting point of a unit test is typically an event. A charm acts like a function, taking event context (always present), configuration, relation data, and stored state as inputs. It then performs operations affecting its workload or other charms:

Reviewer 2: It's a matter of taste, but I'd probably insert a paragraph break before "A charm acts like a function". Either way, the text is good.

- System operations such as writing files.
- Cloud operations such as launching virtual machines.
- Workload operations, using Pebble in the case of a Kubernetes charm.
- Juju operations such as sharing data with related charms.

Unit tests focus on mapping these inputs to expected outputs. For example, a unit test could verify a system call, the contents of a file, or the contents of a relation databag.

> See also: {ref}`write-scenario-tests-for-a-charm`.

### Coverage

Unit testing a charm should cover:

- How relation data is modified as a result of an event.
- What pebble services are running as a result of an event.
- Which configuration files are written and their contents, as a result of an event.

### Tools

> - [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
> - [](ops_testing), the Ops unit testing framework
> - [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) can be used to automate and standardize tests.

Reviewer 2: Duplicate items to remove (I think maybe my suggestion from earlier didn't remove them, sorry):

```suggestion
```

> Charms should have tests to verify that they are functioning correctly. This document describes some of the various types of testing you may want to consider -- their meaning, recommended coverage, and recommended tooling in the context of a charm.

Reviewer 2: I think we can simplify the intro and strengthen it ("may want to" --> "should"):

```suggestion
Charms should have tests to verify that they are functioning correctly. This page describes the types of testing that you should consider.
```

## Unit testing

> Charm unit tests isolate and validate individual code units (functions, methods, etc.) by mocking Juju APIs and workloads without external interactions. Unit tests are intended to be isolating and fast to complete. These are the tests you would run every time before committing code changes.

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestions:

```suggestion
Unit tests isolate and validate individual code units (functions, methods, and so on) by mocking Juju APIs and workloads without external interactions. Unit tests are intended to be isolating and fast to complete. These are the tests you would run before committing any code changes.
```

> A charm acts like a function, taking event context (always present), configuration, relation data, and stored state as inputs. It then performs operations affecting its workload or other charms: system operations (e.g., file writes), cloud operations (e.g., VM launches), workload operations (often via Pebble for Kubernetes charms), and Juju operations (sharing data with related charms). Unit tests focus on mapping these inputs to expected outputs, such as verifying specific system calls, file content based on configuration, or relation data updates given specific events, configurations, and existing relation data.

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph is helpful, but I found it hard to read. How about splitting it like this and reducing the last part a bit:

```suggestion
A charm acts like a function, taking event context (always present), configuration, relation data, and stored state as inputs. It then performs operations affecting its workload or other charms:

- System operations such as writing files.
- Cloud operations such as launching virtual machines.
- Workload operations, using Pebble in the case of a Kubernetes charm.
- Juju operations such as sharing data with related charms.

Unit tests focus on mapping these inputs to expected outputs. For example, a unit test could verify a system call, the contents of a file, or the contents of a relation databag.
```

> Every unit test involves a mocked event context, as charms only execute in response to events. A charm doesn't do anything unless it's being run, and it is only run when an event occurs. So there is _always_ an event context to be mocked, and the starting point of a unit test is typically an event.

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph could be moved into the Context section because it leads naturally into the list of things to cover about events.

> ### The testing framework

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Charm unit testing uses [`ops.testing`](ops_testing) framework for state-transition testing. `State` mocks inputs and outputs, while `Context` and `Container` offer a mock filesystem. Tests involve setup (charm, metadata, context, output mocks, Juju state), event simulation via `Context.run`, output retrieval, and assertions. `Context` and `State` are instantiated before the charm, allowing pre-event state setup (storage, relations, config). `Context` provides methods for simulating various Juju events like `config_changed`, `relation_created`, `relation_joined`, `relation_changed`, `relation_departed`, `storage_attached`, `storage_detached`, `pebble_ready`, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I think we can restructure this part (for easier reading) and move it to the Tools section. Then we don't need a section called "The testing framework". See https://github.com/canonical/operator/pull/1635/files#r2000248446.

> Charm unit testing uses [`ops.testing`](ops_testing) framework for state-transition testing. `State` mocks inputs and outputs, while `Context` and `Container` offer a mock filesystem. Tests involve setup (charm, metadata, context, output mocks, Juju state), event simulation via `Context.run`, output retrieval, and assertions. `Context` and `State` are instantiated before the charm, allowing pre-event state setup (storage, relations, config). `Context` provides methods for simulating various Juju events like `config_changed`, `relation_created`, `relation_joined`, `relation_changed`, `relation_departed`, `storage_attached`, `storage_detached`, `pebble_ready`, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I think we can restructure this part (for easier reading) and move it to the Tools section. Then we don't need a section called "The testing framework". See https://github.com/canonical/operator/pull/1635/files#r2000248446.

> > See also: {ref}`write-legacy-unit-tests-for-a-charm`, {ref}`write-scenario-tests-for-a-charm`.

Reviewer 2: How about dropping the link to legacy testing?

```suggestion
> See also: {ref}`write-scenario-tests-for-a-charm`.
```

### Coverage

Unit testing a charm should cover:

- How relation data is modified as a result of an event.
- What pebble services are running as a result of an event.
- Which configuration files are written and their contents, as a result of an event.

### Tools

> Unit testing a charm can be done using:
> 
> - [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
> - [state transition testing](ops_testing), using the `ops` unit testing framework
> - [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) can be used to automate and standardize tests.

Reviewer 2: Some adjustments, including a part from earlier in the page:

```suggestion
- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
- [](ops_testing), the Ops unit testing framework
- [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) can be used to automate and standardize tests.

- [`ops.testing`](ops_testing), the framework for state-transition testing in Ops
- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)
- [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) for automating and standardizing tests

The `ops.testing` framework provides `State`, which mocks inputs and outputs. The framework also provides `Context` and `Container`, which offer mock filesystems. Tests involve:

1. Setting up the charm, metadata, context, output mocks, and Juju state.
2. Simulating events using `Context.run`. For example, `config_changed`, `relation_changed`, `storage_attached`, `pebble_ready`, and so on.
3. Retrieving and asserting the output.

`Context` and `State` are instantiated before the charm. This enables you to prepare the state of config, relations, and storage before simulating an event.
```

> See also: {ref}`write-tests-for-an-interface`.

### Coverage

Interface tests enable Charmhub to validate the relations of a charm and verify that your charm supports the registered interface. For example, if your charm supports an interface called "ingress", interface tests enable Charmhub to verify that your charm supports the [registered `ingress` interface](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/interfaces/ingress/v2).

Interface tests also:
- Enable alternative implementations of an interface to validate themselves against the contractual specification stored in `charm-relation-interfaces`.
- Help verify compliance with multiple versions of an interface.

An interface test has the following pattern: 

1) **Given** - An initial state of the relation over the interface under test.
2) **When** - A specific relation event fires.
3) **Then** - The state of the databags is valid. For example, the state satisfies a [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) schema.

In addition to validity of the databag state, we could check for more elaborate conditions.

### Tools

- [`ops.testing`](ops_testing)

> - a pytest plugin called [`pytest-interface-tester`](https://github.com/canonical/pytest-interface-tester)

Reviewer 2: Tiny typo:

```suggestion
- A pytest plugin called [`pytest-interface-tester`](https://github.com/canonical/pytest-interface-tester)
```

    t = Tester(State(relations=[relation]))
    # WHEN the charm receives a db-relation-changed event
    state_out = t.run(relation.changed_event)
    # THEN the schema is valid
    t.assert_schema_valid()
```

This enables us to check whether our charm complies with the behavioural specification of the interface, independently from whichever charm is integrated with our charm.

(integration-testing)=
## Integration testing

Integration tests verify the interaction of multiple software components. In the context of a charm, they ensure the charm functions correctly when deployed in a test model in a real controller, checking for "blocked" or "error" states during typical operations. The goal of integration testing is to ensure the charm's operational logic performs as expected under diverse conditions.

Integration tests should be focused on a single charm. Sometimes an integration test requires multiple charms to be deployed for adequate testing, but ideally integration tests should not become end-to-end tests.

Integration tests typically take significantly longer to run than unit tests.

> See also: {ref}`write-integration-tests-for-a-charm`.

> ### Coverage

Reviewer 2: Do you think we should add "Packing and deploying the charm" to the list? Sorry, I think this suggestion might have got lost in an older comment.

Author: This part is already covered in the k8s tutorial, and it's not in the original testing explanation doc or the getting started doc, so maybe we don't have to add it right now?

> Integration tests verify the interaction of multiple software components. In the context of a charm, they ensure the charm functions correctly when deployed in a test model in a real controller, checking for "blocked" or "error" states during typical operations. Leveraging tools like [the `juju` CLI](inv:juju:std:label#list-of-juju-cli-commands), [`python-libjuju`](https://github.com/juju/python-libjuju), [`pytest-operator`](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator), and [`zaza`](https://zaza.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html), these tests cover charm packing, deployment, integration with other applications, configuration changes, action execution, and overall functionality within various combinations of these factors. This ensures the charm's operational logic performs as expected under diverse conditions.

Reviewer 2: I'd probably reduce it to this:

```suggestion
Integration tests verify the interaction of multiple software components. In the context of a charm, they ensure the charm functions correctly when deployed in a test model in a real controller, checking for "blocked" or "error" states during typical operations. The purpose of integration tests is to ensure the charm's operational logic performs as expected under diverse conditions.
```

There's already a section about tools. For the list "charm packing, deployment, [etc]", I think anything that's missing from the list under "Coverage" could be added there instead. For instance, charm packing and deployment aren't in that list.

> > See also: {ref}`write-integration-tests-for-a-charm`

Reviewer 2: For consistency:

```suggestion
> See also: {ref}`write-integration-tests-for-a-charm`.
```

> See also: {ref}`write-legacy-unit-tests-for-a-charm`, {ref}`write-scenario-tests-for-a-charm`.

### Coverage

Unit testing a charm should cover:

- How relation data is modified as a result of an event.
- What pebble services are running as a result of an event.
- Which configuration files are written and their contents, as a result of an event.

### Tools

Unit testing a charm can be done using:

- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
- [state transition testing](ops_testing), using the `ops` unit testing framework
- [`tox`](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/index.html) can be used to automate and standardize tests.

### Examples

- [https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/unit/test_charm.py](https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/unit/test_charm.py)

(interface-tests)=
## Interface testing

Interface tests validate charm library behavior against mock Juju APIs, ensuring compliance with an interface specification without requiring individual charm code.

> > For more information on how to create an interface, {ref}`register-an-interface`.
> 
> Interface specifications, stored in {ref}`charm-relation-interfaces <charm-relation-interfaces>`, are contract definitions that mandate how a charm should behave when integrated with another charm over a registered interface.

Reviewer 2: I think the link would fit better with the following paragraph:

```suggestion
Interface specifications, stored in {ref}`charm-relation-interfaces <charm-relation-interfaces>`, are contract definitions that mandate how a charm should behave when integrated with another charm over a registered interface. For information about how to create an interface, see {ref}`register-an-interface`.
```

> Interface tests will allow `charmhub` to validate the relations of a charm and verify that your charm indeed supports "the" `ingress` interface and not just an interface called "ingress", which happens to be the same name as "the official `ingress` interface v2" as registered in charm-relation-interfaces (see [here](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/interfaces/ingress/v2)).

Reviewer 2: I recommend adding a "Coverage" heading before this part. To help break up the paragraphs for easier reading. Also suggest some adjustments to the text:

```suggestion
### Coverage

Interface tests enable Charmhub to validate the relations of a charm and verify that your charm supports the registered interface. For example, if your charm supports an interface called "ingress", interface tests enable Charmhub to verify that your charm supports the [registered `ingress` interface](https://github.com/canonical/charm-relation-interfaces/tree/main/interfaces/ingress/v2).
```

> Also, they allow alternative implementations of an interface to validate themselves against the contractual specification stored in charm-relation-interfaces, and they help verify compliance with multiple versions of an interface.

Reviewer 2: Suggest splitting this into bullets for easier reading:

```suggestion
Interface tests also:
- Enable alternative implementations of an interface to validate themselves against the contractual specification stored in `charm-relation-interfaces`.
- Help verify compliance with multiple versions of an interface.
```

> An interface test is a contract test powered by [`ops.testing`](ops_testing) and a pytest plugin called [`pytest-interface-tester`](https://github.com/canonical/pytest-interface-tester). An interface test has the following pattern: 
> 
> 1) **GIVEN** an initial state of the relation over the interface under test
> 2) **WHEN** a specific relation event fires
> 3) **THEN** the state of the databags is valid (e.g. it satisfies an expected pydantic schema)
> 
> On top of databag state validity, one can check for more elaborate conditions.

Reviewer 2: Suggest reorganizing this to introduce a "Tools" heading:

```suggestion
An interface test has the following pattern: 

1) **Given** - An initial state of the relation over the interface under test.
2) **When** - A specific relation event fires.
3) **Then** - The state of the databags is valid. For example, the state satisfies a [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) schema.

In addition to validity of the databag state, we could check for more elaborate conditions.

### Tools

- [`ops.testing`](ops_testing)
- a pytest plugin called [`pytest-interface-tester`](https://github.com/canonical/pytest-interface-tester)
```

> A typical interface test will look like:

Reviewer 2: Add an "Examples" heading, to match the other sections?

```suggestion
### Examples

A typical interface test will look like:
```

```python
from interface_tester import Tester

def test_data_published_on_changed_remote_valid():
    """This test verifies that if the remote end has published valid data and we receive a db-relation-changed event, then the schema is satisfied."""
    # GIVEN that we have a relation over "db" and the remote end has published valid data
    relation = Relation(endpoint='db', interface='db',
                        remote_app_data={'model': '"bar"', 'port': '42', 'name': '"remote"', },
                        remote_units_data={0: {'host': '"0.0.0.42"', }})
    t = Tester(State(relations=[relation]))
    # WHEN the charm receives a db-relation-changed event
    state_out = t.run(relation.changed_event)
    # THEN the schema is valid

>     t.assert_schema_valid()

Reviewer 2: I don't understand interface tests well enough to review this. Best for someone else to take a look too.

```

> This allows us to, independently from what charm we are testing, determine if the behavioural specification of this interface is complied with.

Reviewer 2: I find this slightly confusing - "complied with" by what, if  the testing is independent from a charm? How about something like this (if correct):

```suggestion
This enables us to check whether our charm complies with the behavioural specification of the interface, independently from whichever charm is integrated with our charm.
```

* Upgrade sequence
  * Regression test: upgrade stable/candidate/beta/edge from charmhub with the locally-built charm.

```{caution}

When writing an integration test, it is not sufficient to simply check that Juju reports that running the action was successful; rather, additional checks need to be executed to ensure that whatever the action was intended to achieve worked.

```

### Tools

- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
- [pytest-operator](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator) and/or [`zaza`](https://github.com/openstack-charmers/zaza)

> Note that the integration tests and unit tests should run on the same minor Python version as is shipped with the OS as configured under the `charmcraft.yaml` `base.run-on` key. With tox, for Ubuntu 22.04, this can be done using:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Integration tests and unit tests should run using the minor version of Python that is shipped with the OS specified in `charmcraft.yaml` (the `base.run-on` key). For example, if Ubuntu 22.04 is specified in `charmcraft.yaml`, you can use the following tox configuration:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```ini
````

[testenv]
basepython = python3.10
```

(pytest-operator)=

> ### `pytest-operator`

Reviewer 2: Since `pytest-operator` is a tool, we should probably bump it down one level:

```suggestion
#### `pytest-operator`
```

* Upgrade sequence
  * Regression test: upgrade stable/candidate/beta/edge from charmhub with the locally-built charm.

```{caution}

When writing an integration test, it is not sufficient to simply check that Juju reports that running the action was successful; rather, additional checks need to be executed to ensure that whatever the action was intended to achieve worked.

```

### Tools

> - [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) and/or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`pytest`](https://pytest.org/) or [`unittest`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) and
```

> - [pytest-operator](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator) and/or [`zaza`](https://github.com/openstack-charmers/zaza)

Reviewer: I think we should drop mention of zaza (I and I think most of our team knows nothing about it):

```suggestion
- [pytest-operator](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator)
```

It also provides convenient markers and command line parameters (e.g., the `@pytest.mark.skip_if_deployed` marker in combination with the `--no-deploy` configuration helps you skip, e.g., a deployment test in the case where you already have a deployment).

> See more:
> - [`pytest-operator` > Markers](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator/blob/main/docs/reference.md#markers)
> - [`pytest-operator` > Command line parameters](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator/blob/main/docs/reference.md#command-line-parameters)

### Examples

- [https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py](https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py)

## Continuous integration

> Typically, you want the tests to be run automatically against any PR into your repository's main branch, and sometimes, to trigger a new release whenever that succeeds. CD is out of scope for this article, but we will look at how to set up a basic CI.

Reviewer 2: Some minor suggestions for readability:

```suggestion
Typically, you want the tests to be run automatically against any PR into your repository's main branch, and potentially trigger a new release whenever the tests succeed. Continuous deployment is out of scope for this page, but we will look at how to set up basic continuous integration.
```

Create a file called `.github/workflows/ci.yaml`. For example, to include a `lint` job that runs the `tox` `lint` environment:

```yaml
name: Tests
on:
  workflow_call:

jobs:
  lint:
    name: Lint
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: python3 -m pip install tox
      - name: Run linters
        run: tox -e lint
```

> Other `tox` environments can be run similarly; for example unit tests:

Reviewer 2: Minor suggestion:

```suggestion
Other `tox` environments can be run similarly. For example, unit tests:
```

```yaml
  unit-test:
    name: Unit tests
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: python -m pip install tox
      - name: Run tests
        run: tox -e unit
```

> Integration tests are a bit more complex, because in order to run those tests, a Juju controller and a cloud in which to deploy it, is required. This example uses a `actions-operator` workflow provided by `charmed-kubernetes` in order to set up `microk8s` and Juju:

Reviewer 2: Some suggestions to simplify the structure and show people where `actions-operator` comes from:

```suggestion
Integration tests are a bit more complex, because these tests require a Juju controller and a cloud in which to deploy it. The following example uses the [`actions-operator`](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/actions-operator) workflow provided by `charmed-kubernetes` to set up `microk8s` and Juju:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```yaml
````

It also provides convenient markers and command line parameters (e.g., the `@pytest.mark.skip_if_deployed` marker in combination with the `--no-deploy` configuration helps you skip, e.g., a deployment test in the case where you already have a deployment).

> See more:
> - [`pytest-operator` > Markers](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator/blob/main/docs/reference.md#markers)
> - [`pytest-operator` > Command line parameters](https://github.com/charmed-kubernetes/pytest-operator/blob/main/docs/reference.md#command-line-parameters)

### Examples

> - [https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py](https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Prometheus K8s integration tests](https://github.com/canonical/prometheus-k8s-operator/blob/main/tests/integration/test_charm.py)
```

## Continuous integration

Typically, you want the tests to be run automatically against any PR into your repository's main branch, and potentially trigger a new release whenever the tests succeed. Continuous deployment is out of scope for this page, but we will look at how to set up basic continuous integration.

Create a file called `.github/workflows/ci.yaml`. For example, to include a `lint` job that runs the `tox` `lint` environment:

```yaml
name: Tests
on:

>   workflow_call:

Reviewer: Should we make this more realistic, like including `pull_request` and `push: \ branches: \ -main`?

jobs:
  lint:
    name: Lint
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: python3 -m pip install tox
      - name: Run linters
        run: tox -e lint
```

Other `tox` environments can be run similarly. For example, unit tests:

```yaml
  unit-test:
    name: Unit tests
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - name: Checkout
        uses: actions/checkout@v3
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: python -m pip install tox
      - name: Run tests

>         run: tox -e unit

Reviewer: I think just a single example would be fine -- I reckon just the `tox -e unit` one.
